My name is Daryl Lee and I'm the
WebObjects Engineering Manager.
And I'm just curious,
because this is a huge crowd,
how many of you have actually
used WebObjects before?
Wow.
I'm impressed.
You guys have really showed up today.
That's great.
And who has used Web 2.0 or is
currently-- who is using Web 2.0 or
building Web 2.0-like applications
or even knows what Web 2.0 is?
OK,
so there's a few of you guys out there.
So what I'd like to do is actually split
today's session into a couple parts.
First part, we'll do a lot of fun stuff,
talk about Web 2.0, what's in Web 2.0,
how you can use WebObjects to
build Web 2.0 applications.
And then we'll take the second half
to talk about more current things,
what's going on in the
Leopard time frame,
what was just released this last week,
and what you can expect in the future.
So I've got a couple things just
to keep you in your seats here.
And I want to show you a teaser demo.
Hopefully it's all good.
We had a little problem with the demo
machine getting it all set up here.
But I want to tease you with a demo.
And then if you guys are really nice,
and maybe some people will have
a little surprise at the end.
And maybe you guys might
have some fun with that too.
So can we pop to the demo
machine really quickly?
The D machine?
Okay, so this is a little
summer intern project.
Oops.
There we go.
Okay, reload.
So this is a little intern project,
or summer intern here, Chuck,
wrote this summer.
I just thought I'd give you a quick
taste of it and give you a quick tour.
It's a real fun photo browsing app.
You can see it's really interactive.
There's this really nice thumbnail
bar and all kinds of features in here.
By the end of this session,
you'll get an idea of how to
use WebObjects to build an app
like this or some techniques.
And we'll dig a little bit
deeper in a little while.
So this will hopefully keep
your butts in the seats and
interested in listening to me.
Okay, back to slides.
Okay, so what I want to get into is
actually talk about the definition
of Web 2.0 and the Zen of Web 2.0.
When I looked and searched on Google,
I looked at Wikipedia,
what is in Web 2.0?
There really wasn't a definitive spec.
W3C hasn't really pushed
anything specifically what this,
what's in Web 2.0.
And so what I did find was
a lot of interesting quotes,
and I thought I'd share them with
So ZDNet had a bunch of fun articles and
one of them said Web 2.0 is an attitude,
not a technology.
So I'm not sure what to do with it,
but you have to be in the right frame
of mind to build a Web 2.0 application.
Web 2.0 is about giving up control
and setting your data free,
so it's quite metaphysical, you know?
And this next one kind of connected
a little bit more with me when
data interface and metadata
no longer go hand in hand.
Okay, so they're not buddies anymore,
but it sounded like a more model view
controller kind of data pattern that
you guys might be more familiar with.
So, okay, so that's something that's
in the Web 2.0 space.
I saw another thing about the
Web 2.0 conference last year,
and they did this big
brainstorming session,
and they threw all these terminologies,
these concepts,
technologies on the board.
They said,
"This is what's in Web 2.0." And I found
this image on the net of this guy
who actually etched a PowerBook,
and they put all that
terminology on the PowerBook.
And so there is Web 2.0
right there in front of you.
So I'd love to have the PowerBook,
but I don't know if I bind
everything that's on that book.
So instead of just going
into all that terminology,
let's talk about what are some
benchmark Web 2.0 applications,
or what are people actually
trying to build nowadays.
And a couple of years ago,
Google Maps really started this craze.
It was about searching for data
that you're interested in and
displaying it in new interactive ways.
In this case, it was putting it on a map.
And you could interact with the map.
You could drag the map around.
And you could search for pizza
plate joints and find all the
pizza joints within five miles
and have it displayed on the map.
And people thought that was really cool.
And you didn't need a full page refresh.
So this really started off this
craze of more interactive browsing.
So another thing that people are
doing lately is mashing up data.
And what I mean by that is
taking data from different data
sources and presenting them
in new ways and custom ways.
And what you're seeing right
behind me is a virtual shopping
tour of the Notting Hill district.
And what makes this unique is that
if you look right in the center,
there is a Google Map embedded
in there with some custom
views and waypoints in there.
So they're getting their
mapping service from Google.
Then they're pulling-- if
you look in the right corner,
they're pulling weather data
and some sights and sounds of
the actual shopping district.
And that's coming from
a different service.
And then they're combining that
with their custom image data,
which I think you're seeing there with
the Duke of Wellington and other stuff.
So it's the combining of all
different types of data sources into
new and interesting applications
and ways of presenting data.
So how many people are
familiar with Flickr?
Or any kind of thing like Wikipedia,
YouTube?
These things are just
the craze right now,
which is a real collaborative experience.
The users and the internet
community in general are defining
things and sharing their content.
In Flickr,
what you can do is upload a photo.
You can have people comment on it.
They can rate it.
You can tag it with different keywords.
I can say, here's my image of an iPod.
It's from Apple, and it's really cool.
So this is a new craze that a lot
of these sites are jumping onto.
Now, people are taking this whole
Web 2.0 and building application,
desktop applications into the
browsers to a new level now.
And this interactivity,
and they're building typical desktop
applications into the browser.
So, Rightly has actually built a
Word replacement in the browser.
And I think recently
Google bought Rightly.
But what's interesting about this is that
people can collaborate distributively.
And what I mean by that is you
can have someone working on the
same document that's in Tokyo,
in New York, in Paris at the same time.
They can merge the changes
and make the revisions,
and everybody gets updated.
And so there's a lot of stuff going on in
the server to keep everybody synced up.
So, we think that's really cool.
But people have even been going farther,
and they're getting this brushed metal,
really embedding full-featured
apps like Outlook Express.
And Zimbra did this pretty well.
And they got a lot of buzz last
year in the Web 2.0 conference,
and they won a lot of awards for this.
And so, as you can see,
they've embedded what really looks
like a full-featured mail client.
There's calendaring in there.
There are RSS readers in there.
And they also do a lot of extra
things to scrape data from your emails
and such to add more context to it.
So, like, if you had a UPS package and
you had a tracking number,
they could actually
add more context to it.
So.
That's like the gold standard right now.
Zimbra is getting a lot of buzz.
And finally,
I want to just share with you a real fun
one that I found out about the other day,
which was this Flyakite OS X.
And what someone actually did was
use JavaScript to make a Finder-like
experience within the web browser.
It's a little strange here,
but as you can see,
there are stickies available.
It has a hierarchical browsing
of a pseudo file system there.
They have an iTunes-like app in
there and system preferences,
et cetera.
So people are taking this whole
interactivity level to a new level.
So I thought I'd share that with you.
So what I want to do is just boil
down some of the concepts out there
that we saw in that PowerBook to some
things that I think are interesting.
And I bet you a lot of you
guys have heard of AJAX.
I mean,
who hasn't heard of the buzzword AJAX?
Asynchronous Java and XML.
People are really using this kind
of development pattern to fetch
small chunks of data or UI bits and
dynamically change their UI on the fly.
So traditional Web 1.0 apps,
you had to do a full page refresh to
write new data into your web page.
But what people are doing now is
pulling in small chunks and then
manipulating the DOM tree to actually
insert this data into the UI.
Other things that people are doing a lot,
and I'm sure you've heard of a lot,
is syndication and leveraging
things like Atom and RSS to
publish and subscribe to data.
People are also trying to find new
ways to make their data public.
So a number of years ago,
WSDL and that type of web service
was supposed to free up people's
data and actually allow people
to share data more freely.
But actually what it's done is
it's been so complex that a lot
of people haven't jumped in.
And so people are looking for
simpler ways to access data,
provide interfaces,
whether it be JavaScript or Flex or any
number of lower or simpler SOAP objects.
And as I mentioned earlier,
Flickr and Wikipedia and other stuff
are doing tagging and collaborative and
matching up data in different new ways.
And finally,
I just wanted to mention microformats
is becoming pretty popular.
And what that is actually
doing is embedding structured
data within your Web page.
Yahoo recently said they're
going to support microformats.
And so that'll be an interesting
way to present your data and
pass data to the clients.
So, what technology do I need to learn
or do I have to have in my toolbox
to actually build a Web 2.0 app?
Now, if you look right behind me,
there is nothing new there.
There is absolutely nothing new.
XML Soap,
been around for the last 10 or 12 years.
JavaScript, 10 or 12 years.
I think it's only being used in new ways.
And I think about six years ago,
XML HTTP request object
was kind of introduced,
I think, in IE.
And that is being leveraged in
the AJAX style of architecture.
And then JSON,
JavaScript Object Notation,
is also something people
are leveraging more,
which is a way to optimize passing
data from the server to the client.
Adam Spex, they're quite straightforward
and pretty simple to learn.
Those aren't that new either.
It's been around at
least four years or more,
five years.
CSS, DHTML, that's not new.
And REST, ideas of REST services,
which are just a new way
to interface into data,
those aren't new either.
[Transcript missing]
So what I thought I'd start doing
is just show you guys a few building
blocks and how to build and start
off with Syndication and show you how
to build a really reusable RSS feed
and an Atom feed and just give you
ideas on how to break those down into
components and use WoE XML nodes as
your base components to build a feed.
So can we move over to the demo machine?
This one right here.
I need to switch it?
Yeah.
Okay.
So let me fire this up really quickly.
So we like Eclipse at Apple,
and we like Xcode,
but I thought I'd demo in both worlds.
So you're going to get a
mixture of both IDEs here.
And all right.
It's taking a minute or two to come up.
So other things when you're thinking
about building a syndicated feed
is to leverage direct actions.
Syndicated feeds do not need to
have state associated with it.
It does not need to have a session
associated necessarily with it.
So let me just fire up my app really
quick and give you guys a preview.
Alright, so I've got a basic feed,
lots of cool stuff here.
There is one data source and
here's another data source.
So what I've, I'll get into the details
a little bit more,
but it's really easy to build any type
of data source or feed components that
can be mapped to a different data source.
So I've mapped one data source to this
Atom feed and my initial RSS feed,
and then I've actually created
a different data source for
this alternative data feed.
And it's all dynamic.
So let's just add something,
Project Wonder.
3.0 came out today.
Let me just put a link
in here really quick.
That's really cool.
I submit that.
As you can see, in my RSS feed,
it's updated dynamically.
And here in my Atom feed,
it updated dynamically.
So I just wanted to show how
easy it is to actually put
something together like this.
If you look at the left gutter here,
I broke down the spec into
their base components,
each entity component,
and used WillXML nodes to represent that.
And you can actually dynamically,
codelessly bind these components up to
your display group or your data source.
So I think that just gives you
a flavor of how to build a feed.
Here's my two RSS feeds,
and basically I just bound those same
components to different data sources.
So hopefully that gives you a quick idea.
I'm not going to give a complete
hands-on demo on how that works,
but you can definitely come and
ask me at one of the sessions or
the labs or the feedback forum
for more information about this.
So back to the keynote slides.
So one thing I mentioned earlier was
about open APIs and actually sharing
APIs or data or client libraries amongst
the community and then allowing them
to leverage that and map new types of
data or information on top of that.
And so what I wanted to do is experiment
and show you guys how to make a
reusable component that wraps all this,
an API of a Web 2.0 type of library
and then allow you to share or give you
an idea of how to make that component
codeless so people can just bind to
various options in that component and not
have to recompile and not have to write
any code or have any inherent knowledge.
So what I did was actually take
the Yahoo Maps API and I combined
it with some of our WebObjects
componentness and repurposed that
and pushed that to the client.
So this is just a quick
diagram of what is going on.
Let me just jump in really
quickly to the demo and show
you how that kind of might work.
So let me start it.
I call this my Will Map container.
And what you're going to see
here is a real basic map.
There's not anything that interesting,
except maybe there's a navigation
window in the corner there.
But I want to really customize this and
make it more interesting and put some
data on there and have some fun with it.
So let's go drop in and let me just
show you the component really quickly.
So I created this
WoW Map Container component,
and I dropped it in here
to my main component.
So there's my WOMAP container.
And then there are a whole bunch
of bindings available here.
Is it draggable?
What's the height?
Let's change zoom levels,
latitude and longitude for
where it's centered and stuff.
And so what I can do is actually
modify these bindings on the fly.
So what I'd like to do is add
some interesting waypoints.
[Transcript missing]
And a great thing about
WebObjects is actually that we
have a rapid turnaround mode.
And so if you don't actually
change any of the Java source code,
you can modify your components
and then just do a page refresh,
which I'm going to do right now.
And boom, you're seeing my changes
updated really quickly.
Now we're drawing a bunch
of custom waypoints up here.
And the zoom level's changed.
And I'm waiting for some of the
other stuff to show up here.
There we go.
I mapped it to a feed that shows the
state parks within the California.
And here are some traffic feeds here,
too.
So there's an accident on Marsh Road,
in case any of you guys
are driving down that way.
Okay, so that's just a flavor.
What's great about this is,
as you notice,
I just changed bindings right here,
and we always encourage
reusable components.
And this component can be
shareable with your colleagues,
and they won't have to know, okay,
what's the JavaScript API call
to actually turn on these
options within Yahoo Maps?
What do I have to do?
What do I have to learn?
How much docs do I have to read?
All I have to do is actually
look at your bindings here.
And they'll have an easy access,
or it's really pretty
obvious what those things do.
So like I said,
there's no innate need to know
the internals if you wrap some
of these Web 2.0 APIs correctly.
Okay, so the next thing I wanted to
do was actually do a little
bit more server-side crunching.
And I thought about, okay, well,
let's combine some of the
syndication aspects of the
Web 2.0 API or specification,
and let's go scrape a bunch of RSS feeds
and data mine it for data or information.
And then let's dynamically
pull that back and forth,
update that on our WebObjects server,
and put that data into a database.
And while we're scraping that data,
geocode that information,
so add some geocoding context to it.
And then on the client,
present in a new way
using Yahoo Maps again,
because that's pretty interesting,
and put a new kind of customized
look and feel of the app and
the interactivity of the app.
So if I can jump to the
demo machine really quickly,
and we can talk about this.
So I call my app the
Woe Rentals Application.
And Woe Rentals Housing.
So what you're going to see is
I've customized my map even more.
And what happened there was the
WebObjects server had scraped
a bunch of Craigslist feeds.
And it data-mined the
rental information for it,
for rental housing.
And then we geocoded it.
And then we displayed
the data in a custom way.
In this case,
we found all the image data.
And we added a little bit more
context to the waypoints and such.
And as you can see,
now I have a really quick and
dirty kind of rentals application
where you can get an idea,
give a geographic context to all this
scraped information from the feed.
Other things you can do is talk
back to the server and let's just...
Look for only places in
San Francisco and we can go over here,
we can zoom in a little
bit more and take a look.
We're pulling from Yahoo Maps,
so it might be a little bit
slower here over our network here.
Anyways,
so every time I change this search,
we're actually going back and forth with
WebObjects server using XMLHB requests
to fetch small chunks of data and
display those small waypoints there.
Hopefully that gives you an
idea of how you might want
to integrate with other APIs,
how WebObjects might be in the back end.
I'm only giving you a flavor.
I don't think this is
not a hands-on session,
so I'm not going to dig
into all the details,
but it's pretty straightforward
to build something like this.
So can we switch back
to the keynote slides?
So what I created was a kind
of a server-side aggregator.
I used EOF a bunch to actually
save my data that has been geocoded
and then actually query on it.
And I used direct actions quite
heavily because it was the
simplest way to implement this.
You don't need a lot of sessionful,
kind of stateful information
to be contained in here.
So hopefully you get an idea of
how to build an app like this.
So.
Our summer intern this year,
he was given the project of, of course,
using WebObjects.
He had to make something
really cool and interactive,
so we wanted a nice Web 2.0 app
that showed off some of the best
of what people are doing out there.
And so it needed to
be really interactive,
a lot of user input,
and a real snappy interface.
And of course,
since our fearless leader always talks
about having insanely great apps,
we thought it should be insanely cool.
So if we can switch to the
demo machine really quick.
Okay,
so the demo machine to the left here.
So I'll just log into
our app really quick.
I really didn't give you guys that
much of a tour earlier of this app.
Let me show you some things
that you might not have seen,
which is if I scroll quick enough,
this scroll bar is actually lazy
loading all these thumbnails.
And we're using a lot of XMLHPU requests
to fetch small chunks or batch
chunks of data over to the client.
Other things that are really fun with
this app is that it's got a nice little
zoom mode so I can actually look at
the pixel level almost at the Eiffel
Tower and see what people are looking at.
If I pop out of that,
Let's go, another fun feature is a
fine feature we have here.
If I type tree, it's slowly narrowing
down my search query.
So it's actually doing a query back
and forth to the server to update
the information that it needs to
display here for this thumbnail bar,
or image bar.
Another fun thing we did was actually
add keywords to all our data.
So let me just do an info on...
[Transcript missing]
Oh, whoops, OK.
I had something.
OK, there we go.
I want you to change some ratings here.
So as you can see,
this is a big round trip.
And we're broadcasting notifications any
time the data updates from our WebObjects
server that's talking with direct actions
back and forth to our data source.
Okay, so we thought that was fun,
but we want even more interactivity.
So we thought that chatting would be fun.
So let me say hi to Chuck here.
And so what we're also doing is just
doing a lot of round-tripping to
our WebObjects server for this chat.
Distributely, and as you can see,
we're not doing page refreshes.
Only that window is
updating in small chunks.
Okay, so let me just resize here.
Oops.
There we go.
So anyways, it's a very fun,
interactive app.
And what I want to show
you really quickly,
if we can go back to slides, is that...
[Transcript missing]
So if you go to the lab
or something like that,
I'm sure Chuck will be
happy to show it to you.
He's very enthusiastic.
Yeah, maybe.
So I'll just reiterate what
I was talking about before.
Each one of these UI components
is actually working independently,
and it's doing its own chatting
back and forth to the WebObjects
server independently and
fetching in chunks of data,
updating,
and notifying various other parts of
the client that need updating that
That's just an idea of how to
make a dynamic app and maybe
a flavor of what you probably
want to do in a Web 2.0 world.
Okay, so that was our quick overview
of WebObjects and Web 2.0,
but we also have a lot
of other ground to cover,
which is actually what's
coming up in WebObjects.
So, I'd like to talk about transitions.
And, yeah.
We as Apple are, you know, we're looking,
I'm sure you guys have
seen certain notices,
I think we'll address
that a little bit later,
but we're also looking
for new ways to actually,
I think, in the next year or two,
to work a little bit more closer
with you as a community into
extending WebObjects and bolting
on functionality to WebObjects.
And we're also trying to bring WebObjects
more to the center of the Java world,
and we have some initiatives to do that.
So, what's new in WebObjects?
So, earlier this week,
Xcode 2.4 came out,
and we can talk about that.
For Leopard, we have quite a bit
of deployment changes,
so the way you might deploy an
app with an Apache 1.3 server
on 10 server has changed.
And, you know,
some of that is due to Apache 2 becoming
the default web server on our platform.
We're actually planning to open up
a lot of specifications to you guys.
And I'll talk about that in a minute.
We're bringing an ant build system.
So, I don't know if you guys are
going to be happy about that.
And there are also some support
changes we'll talk about.
So Xcode 2.4.
So to achieve the most backwards
compatibility with our runtime libraries,
we use a JDK 1.5 compiler,
but we made all of our projects
compile with the source 1.4,
target 1.4 flag.
So we think that as far as
backwards compatibility,
this is the best way to protect you guys.
and in the future.
We made a lot of Xcode compatibility
fixes to make sure that IDE and
all the apps are talking
correctly and working correctly.
And then there is a
security fix in there.
One thing our security team
actually asked us to do was
turn OpenBase off by default.
So release the release notes about that.
So I don't know if you
should clap for that.
So as far as Leopard goes,
we're making large deployment changes.
I'd really encourage you
guys to go to the WebObjects
deployment session tomorrow.
There's going to be a lot
of good content in there.
I'll just go through a
little high-level overview.
We're bringing non-blocking I/O,
so a lot of the well-worker threads
that you're used to working with
or are used to in that environment
are not going to be necessary.
So look,
we're using a standard Java stack,
the non-blocking I/O stack,
for processing our
request response loops.
So tomorrow we'll have
more information on that.
We're also providing a
new monitoring solution.
So we're actually trying to move to JMX,
which is a more standard
Java-like way of monitoring
and managing your applications.
So a lot of people have already asked me,
OK,
so how do I actually monitor these apps?
If you look at the next bullet,
Java Monitor is not going
to be what we're going to be
encouraging people to use.
Well, JConsole is part of the default
distribution in the JVM.
There are also a huge number of open
source projects that allow you to
do JMX monitoring and management.
So you can find out more
about that tomorrow.
And then Apache 2 is
going to be supported.
And we're going to have a new way.
There's not going to be a mod
WebObjects module anymore.
And we're going to use the
standard Apache mod proxy balancer.
So definitely get some more
information on that tomorrow.
So another initiative that we have
is actually opening up as much of our
specifications as possible and giving you
guys some tool sets to extend WebObjects,
build new apps or technologies
or tools on top of it.
So our first step today was
actually posting the WoE component
bundle specification and
the EO model specification.
Those are in draft form.
They're available at the
URL above for this session.
We'll make them public later.
Thank you.
The other thing, in order to support some
of those specifications,
is we're planning to release
the WoE Component Parsing Code.
And that will be just available
to everybody in developer
examples to play with.
It will hopefully enable you guys
to consume WoE Components easier
and do interesting things with them.
Since this Eclipse project entity
modeler is actually already parsing
EO model components or bundles,
we're actually encouraging people to
look at that because I think they do a
pretty good job as far as showing how
to parse EO model components or bundles.
Another request we've had for
quite a number of years is,
can you guys give us
the Java U UtilSource?
And I don't know how
many of you use that,
but it's a real convenient
utility for exporting and
importing data from databases.
And it's a little switchblade knife of
doing a lot of different kinds of things.
So we thought we'd throw that out there.
We had a number of requests for that.
And we think that that will help people
that want to bolt on functionality to
their apps to do more stuff with that.
And of course, I mentioned Java Monitor.
So we're providing the source on
disk with the developer tools.
And we've heard a lot of requests
over the years that you want the
source so that you can customize
Monitor or WOTASD for your deployment
environment or specific needs.
So we're giving you that stack to
play with and do what you want with.
We're also encouraging you to
check out our new stack and new
way of deploying on 10th server.
So there's a lot.
options available to you guys.
So as I mentioned, the build system,
we're really interested in
leveraging Ant and using a
more Java-like build system.
Many of you weren't so enthusiastic
about the Jam build system,
and so we're making that move this year.
And we're trying to make the build
system compatible with other IDEs,
so we'll try to support as best as
possible the integration aspects.
So if you want to use
Eclipse or NetBeans,
et cetera, to build your WebObjects apps,
we're trying to provide that integration.
And of course, that means that the old
build system is deprecated,
but we're not going to
remove it from disk,
so there'll be a long transition
period where you guys don't have
to migrate your apps right away,
but we're really encouraging you to.
So a lot of this openness and
what we're trying to do is
actually prop up you guys.
And we're really trying to
help these projects especially,
because we think they're
doing a really great job.
I don't know how many of you
use WoeLips or WoeProject,
but it's really cool.
Rule Modeler, people think it's a great
replacement for Rule Editor,
and we'd like to encourage the
further development of that.
And then there's a recent
application or plug-in to
Will Lips called Entity Modeler,
and we think it's a really
full-featured modeling plug-in.
So we'll talk about that in a minute.
And then Project Wonder, of course,
has just been a great
support to the community.
And a lot of Apple engineers have
contributed to that in the past,
and we're encouraging
you guys to look at that,
too.
So what I'd like to do right now is
actually bring Mike Schrag up here.
He did the Entity Modeler.
So I'm going to see if we can take
the picture here because I don't know
what better way for the mailing list
to see that it's not actually dead.
Demo machine number two.
Yeah, thank you.
So what's that?
No problem.
All right.
So what is Entity Modeler?
I'm going to equip the Eclipse
that they're running and run the
24 hours ago build of Eclipse.
So we get the...
Latest and greatest.
For people that have
been around for the past,
oh, say, 10 years,
you may be familiar with EOModeler.
And you may be familiar with the fact
that EOModeler may not have actually
changed much in those 10 years.
And it carries around several
bugs that may not have really
changed much in 10 years.
So at the Will Lips Project,
Will Lips Project Enterprises,
we basically were looking at what
were our options going forward because
we'd like to provide better support
because obviously things like EOModeler
app being deprecated and things
moving towards the Xcode plugin and,
of course,
demo guides being what they are.
That's a whole new one.
That's not even our fault.
Talk to the eclipse people on that one.
Of course, yes.
All right.
We'll take two there.
So what we basically wanted to do
was provide some mechanism to support
EO model editing inside of Eclipse.
And they're just going to make
me jump through hoops here,
aren't they?
Take three.
The other nice thing at WoLips,
we don't have to care about things
like release cycles and code quality
necessarily as much as Apple might.
We just fixed this and put out
the fix later today for that.
Oh, nice rendering bugs there.
All right,
so for anyone who has not seen Eclipse,
this is what Eclipse looks
like when you open it up in the
traditional Java perspective.
And the way that Eclipse is configured
is the concept of perspectives and views,
where perspectives are sort
of collections of related
views of your project.
And so one of the new
perspectives that's in here,
if you notice this icon up here,
is the entity modeler perspective.
So I have a project here
called Secret Santa,
which is actually an app that my
family uses to manage Secret Santa.
And so you see in the
Java package perspective,
or Java package explorer view,
the Secret Santa EO model here
that has the entities inside of it.
We actually are parsing these
things so we can actually tell
you that this is actually an
entity and this is an EO model.
If I were to actually open this,
if you used Eclipse before,
you would see that this
is actually an entity.
So if you know the open EO model,
there's now an open entity modeler.
And so, yes, I always wanted to.
This is entity modeler.
This may look somewhat
familiar for people who have
used EO modeler in the past.
In fact,
the icons may look very familiar to you.
and in fact, if you were TMD5 some,
the icons would look really familiar.
So,
what we really wanted to do was provide
a full replacement for EOModeler.
I started out saying, all right, well,
I'll just kind of do the things
that I use because I really
wanted an EOModeler replacement.
But very quickly,
I started getting emails from
people from all over saying,
well, what about stored procedures?
You don't support stored procedures.
And what about fetchbacks
with stored procedures?
You don't support those.
So, before long,
it basically was the full
EOModeler replacement.
So, the organization of this
is slightly different.
Inside of Eclipse,
or inside of EOModeler and Xcode,
you have the concept of inspector panels.
It's not really a very common
idiom inside of Eclipse.
Inside of Eclipse,
we have these sort of property
panels and these other views.
So, this is actually a properties view,
just like properties view inside
of the other perspectives,
but with some custom
contributed inspector views,
essentially.
And so, when I select an EOModel,
I see my adapter configuration and I can
get user info and I select an entity,
I get all of the things you would expect.
So, some of the things that I'll
assume that you pretty much know
how EOModeler basically works.
So, I won't go over the little stuff,
but I'll show you some of the things
that we do a little bit differently.
One of the big ones is prototype support.
If you've used prototype
support inside of EOModeler,
you know that it has some issues.
In particular, my most hated one,
I call the brown column of death.
Inside of EOModeler,
if you change your prototype,
you lose your column name in EOModeler.
You don't lose your column
name in entity modeler.
It stays.
One of the other things,
if you happen to use Project Wonder,
for instance,
we support the prototype naming
scheme and resolution for those
that appears inside of ER model,
or sorry, Project Wonder.
For instance, ER prototypes and your
ER front-based JDBC prototypes,
we find those and actually
hook those up properly.
If you notice my,
actually let me select one of the,
you notice this ID is of type integer
because I'm on front-based right now.
If I were to go into my adapter
and change this over to Oracle.
and TabOut.
I come back and you notice
that changed to number.
We dynamically resolve
prototypes in the fly.
[Transcript missing]
What we do is basically,
that's much faster than
I thought it would be.
On the fly, we take all of the JAR files
that comprise your project
and all their dependencies.
We find all the EO models in that,
and we find all of the WebObjects
JAR files you point to,
and all the plugins that you point to,
more importantly.
We actually SQL generate using the exact
same plugins that you get at runtime.
This SQL generation here matches
exactly your SQL generation at runtime,
which is not necessarily
true in old EO Modeler.
You get kind of a weird Java 1.1
JDBC old SQL generation.
That's a particularly nice feature.
In addition,
there's some ways you can hook into
this process and actually tweak.
You can catch delegate events
before we generate SQL.
You can mess with the model
in memory to do custom things.
After we generate SQL,
you can grab it and actually
literally inject your own SQL into
this flow on a per-project basis.
You can literally drop a Java file in
your project that implements a particular
interface that we hook into on the fly.
That is SQL generation.
One of the other big ones is
Java source code generation.
In EO Modeler, they have their own custom
method of generating Java.
We actually use EO Generator.
For anyone who has not
looked at EO Generator,
I highly recommend it.
That's rubicode.com.
It's basically a much,
much more advanced templating system for
generating Java files based on EO Models.
In this case,
one of the paradigms in Eclipse is sort
of incremental on-the-fly building.
We sort of support that same concept,
which you can turn on and
off if you don't like it.
In EO Modeler, you can actually build a
project on your project,
this billing workspace,
and it actually figures out which
EO Generator configurations are
associated with this model and
auto-builds everything all the
way down on all your dependent
projects that might depend on this.
For instance,
if I go and add a new attribute here,
I can see that I have
a new attribute here.
So, tell it this is a Boolean,
call it new attribute, column name.
I always forget which ones are editable,
which ones aren't.
And when I save now, which didn't save my
column because I was in it.
So one of the things we hook into the
new Jface data bindings in Eclipse,
which is a brand new specification that's
not actually public in Eclipse yet,
and so it has some issues.
So when I save, it now auto-EO generates,
and if I actually go
and look at the code,
this on the fly generated code and
changed the methods which now are a
compiler because I have things that are,
you know, my EO generator file specifies
sort of pseudo-constructors.
So it's showing me that I had a
new not null field that now has
to be added to this so that the
Java file is totally on the fly,
Eclipse is refreshed automatically,
and so everything is just
sort of kept in sync.
So and of course I closed my model.
So the big takeaway here
is this is open source.
It's available now in beta form.
We've had several people with
fairly complicated models
actually hitting this thing.
Thanks, Alan.
And so it seems to be
fairly robust at this point.
I actually use it on my own models.
So I do eat my own dog food also,
except I used it two weeks
ago when it destroyed things.
So I encourage you to give it a try.
If you haven't tried Eclipse,
give that a try.
Contribute to the source.
Objectstyle.org slash woelips is
the wiki page that has all the
information you need to get it.
And get on the mailing list,
submit requests for features.
We are perfectly happy
to add new features in.
Some of the things we have planned,
index support.
One of the big missing things in
NeoModeler is you can't define an
index other than your primary key.
Entity Modeler in the relatively
near-term future will add support
for defining arbitrary indexes for
multiple columns on all your entities.
Some of the other things are hooking
into the refactoring system in Eclipse.
You notice I have these class names here.
When I change a class name in Eclipse,
it would be very nice to actually
contribute to the refactoring and
automatically update my model so
it reflects those changes as well.
And hook into EOGenerator to be able to
update my underscore versions of those.
So some of those things
we have planned also.
And any other ideas,
things that you're sick of
NeoModeler doing or not doing,
let us know and we'll be happy to do it.
So one of the last things I just
wanted to point out is Apple has been
really cool about supporting this.
We've gotten direct support
from WoW developers and the
release of those specifications,
which they're really nice to give
us sort of pre-releases of to see,
oh, hey,
there are keys in NeoModeler files
that are 10 years old that aren't
used anymore that we need to support.
So Apple's been great.
And I think all of these recent
announcements are really exciting.
So again, WoW is not dead.
Thank you.
Thanks, Mike.
So what I'd like to
do-- that's great stuff.
We're really happy about
what Mike's been doing.
And we encourage you guys
to check out the projects.
What I'd like to do is
actually invite Max Muller up
to talk about Project Wonder.
As Daryl mentioned,
my name is Max Muller.
I am the manager of the content
engineering group within the Music Store.
And it is amazing how fast time flies.
So in 2001,
I announced on behalf of NetStructure
that we were open sourcing
two of our base frameworks,
ER Extensions and ER Direct Web.
So six months later,
Project Wonder was born on SourceForge
to host those two frameworks.
And here we are five years
later with over 30 frameworks.
And with the help of Mike and Andrew,
who have just done amazing,
amazing jobs on enhancing,
there's now close to 900
commits just since January.
So they've done an amazing job bringing
all sorts of things from SAP integration,
IAM integration, Apache 2.2 work,
and most recently, essentially,
the rule modeler and the AJAX support.
So for those of you who
are interested in AJAX,
the AJAX frameworks have
all of kind of the basics.
So we have the base integration
with WebObjects in there.
So JS proxies,
essentially the draggable actions,
and just provides a really great
framework for building your AJAX work on.
And it comes with a very cool demo.
So I highly, highly suggest that those of
you who are interested in the
AJAX work essentially check it out.
Likewise, Andrew recently announced
on the mailing list,
and it's official today,
that essentially the 3.0 version
of Project Wonder is now out.
And yes.
No.
Andrew and co.
So that basically-- I won't go through
all the enhancements that it adds,
but it adds stuff like
JDBC connection pooling,
cursor support.
It adds some of the AJAX stuff and a
number of other slew of enhancements.
So go and check out the
latest release there.
There's a lot of stuff
that is very relevant.
So for those of you who
are new to WebObjects,
Project Wonder also essentially
has a lot of great example code and
was written by people who really
understand the technology well.
Now I'm not just saying that
because I'm a committer,
and there's a lot of my code out there,
but where I'm also a user.
So within the Music Store,
we're all essentially WebObjects,
Project Wonder.
So if you browse the Music Store and
languages other than English,
and UK English does count,
then you're going through essentially
all the localization extensions
within the Wonder framework.
If you received a receipt
email from the Music Store,
and I hope all of you have
and received many of them,
then you basically were going
through an ERC mail message.
So we've basically leveraged it heavily
within the Music Store development,
and it's obviously very robust and
fully featured from our perspective.
Likewise, about 20% of our developers are
actually committers within Wonder,
and regularly essentially contribute
back bug fixes and enhancements
to the actual Wonder frameworks.
Likewise,
we also work very closely with Beryl's
group for essentially looking at
some of the new stuff within the NIO,
looking at essentially the deployment,
some of the enhancements we
can do around the deployment,
as well as contributing back bug fixes.
So within the next release,
you'll be getting a lot of essentially
the stuff that we basically found
and enhanced within the base product.
And earlier this year,
thanks to a lot of the help
from the Woe Lips group,
we now have the Music Store completely
building in AMP,
and our developers are split about
50/50 in IntelliJ and Eclipse,
and just actually in the past year,
we've been basically playing around with
Entity Modeler and loading up a number of
models from essentially the Music Store.
And we basically take
advantage of all the tricks,
the inheritance, both vertical,
horizontal, prototyping,
all the kind of bells and whistles,
cross-model relationships.
And it's actually been working
out rather well for us.
So we hope to essentially have
been moved over on that front.
And with that,
I will turn it back over to Daryl.
DARYL FOX: Thanks.
- So yeah,
we're really happy about what's going on
in Project Wonder and we use it heavily
within Apple and we're really excited
about a lot of the developments in there.
So what I'd like to move on now
is actually invite my boss up,
Francois, some of you might remember
him from the past,
but he's the Java and
WebObjects Technologies Manager.
- Hello, my man.
Hello, my name is Francois Jouaux.
I manage the Java and WebObjects
engineering teams at Apple.
I've been with WebObjects since 1995.
Actually, yeah, 1995,
the original WebObjects engineering team.
And since that,
there's hardly a day when I don't have
a new idea on how to use WebObjects or
-- and there is not yet a technology
that has stumbled WebObjects,
prevented WebObjects
prevented us to use WebObjects
to take advantage of it.
Well,
they always call me for the hard part.
Let's get to it.
What the future holds.
So let's talk about JDKs,
the Java Bridge,
Iokoko Client and Java Client,
and the WebObjects tools.
I thought I would quote Carl Gretton,
and we stumbled on this quote
yesterday on the mailing list,
and it's a perfect summary of what
we're going to be dealing with today.
The Objective-C Java bridge is old.
It has served its purpose.
It was built on the original JDK from
Sun and it suffers many flaws.
It's time to move on.
JDK support.
So as you've heard,
we are moving to JDK 1.5 since
the OS is already on Java 2.0 SE5.
This means that in Leopard,
the baseline will be 1.5.
And we will be supporting
Java 1.5 for WebObjects.
One of the reasons is that the necessary
JMX specifications that we want to,
the dependencies we want to introduce
are in 1.5 JMX specifications.
And as soon as Java SE 6 is available,
we will also support it.
Cocoa Java.
What does that mean for the
different versions of Xcode?
In Xcode, in the Xcode 2.x family,
you have today all these
possibilities for Java bridge
and Cocoa Java development.
Project creation,
building existing projects,
adding new bridge classes and so on,
and running Cocoa Java applications.
In Xcode 3.0,
product creation will be gone and
you will not be able to create new
Java bridge applications from scratch.
You will be able to build existing
projects but not bridge new classes.
Take Cocoa classes,
bridge them into Java.
I don't think many people have
ever been doing this because
it's a complicated process.
But this is gone.
So in Leopard, your bridge application
will still be running.
You should not create new ones.
The alternatives to Cocoa Java.
The advice, again,
is to not create new bridge
classes today in Nextcode 2.4.
Use JNI to access native code from Java.
This is a sure and trusted way to do it.
That's what we are doing when we are
implementing Java on top of MacOSX.
Use Cocoa for your GUI applications or
Swing if you want to stick with Java,
but do not mix and match.
The Cocoa APIs exposed in Java have
been stalled for at least two releases.
You don't have access to
the latest goodies there,
and you should take advantage of them.
Objective-C, not 0.2,
but 2.0 is available.
And it has many Java-like
language features,
garbage collection properties,
new for loops.
And I encourage you to look
at this language as well.
And it adds hooks for script bridging.
If you ever wanted to
implement your own data bridge,
have fun.
Go for it.
We tried.
IOCoco Java.
So IOCoco Java was introduced in the
early 2000s and was meant to provide a
Cocoa frontend for WebObjects server.
The story,
since it is partly built on the bridge,
the story is similar here.
In Xcode 3.0,
you will not be able to create
new Iokoko Java applications,
but you will be able to
build existing projects.
And the runtime will stay
available on Leopard.
I don't know how many Iokoko
Java applications are out there.
One.
Okay.
Shipping.
Well, it's shipping.
It will keep shipping.
And it will keep working.
This brings us to
WebObjects Cocoa Java Tools.
Actually, did I have-- maybe
missing something here.
WebObjects Cocoa Java Tools.
So many of our developer tools,
unfortunately,
were built on top of the Java bridge.
This led to a lot of pain
and trouble for my team.
As Cocoa was moving forward,
as Xcode was moving forward,
we've had to go through really convoluted
paths to keep the tools working.
Today, I am announcing that the
following tools are deprecated.
EOModeler, WebObjects Builder,
Rule Editor, Roa Launcher,
and the Web Services Assistant.
Some slides are messed up
by Javaclient compatibility.
This is similar to Iokoko Java.
Since it is built on the bridge,
we need to deprecate product creation,
but your applications will keep running.
Alternatives to EO-Cocoa
Java on Java Client.
Do not write new projects
using deprecated frameworks,
client frameworks,
which are JavaEO-Cocoa,
JavaEO application, distribution,
generation, and the interface frameworks,
either for Cocoa or Swing.
Use Cocoa and Core Data on the client,
or use Swing and the EO-Java frameworks.
Use pure web services to communicate
with the WebObjects server.
This should bring you in line much
more with what the industry is doing.
These were really proprietary
communication mechanisms,
and they were very hard to move forward.
So let's get back to the WebObjects
tools that are duplicated.
The EA Modeler and its plugins
should be replaced by Entity Modeler.
You've seen the demo of Entity Modeler.
There are very few things missing.
I could think of maybe two.
The diagram view.
It's good to show to your boss,
but I have never really seen the
usability of the diagram view.
You're going to do it anyway, so.
and reverse engineering,
and that I know is coming.
That is very important.
WebObjects Builder is
replaced by WoeLips.
Most of the hardcore developers
that were building components
were using WoeLips anyway,
or a pure text-based editor
for the Woe components.
WoeLips have syntax coloring and a
lot of goodies that it gets for free
from Eclipse for editing components.
Rule Editor is superseded
by Rule Modeler.
Web Services Assistant should
also be replaced by Role Modeler.
And our Launcher is just dropping off.
So in summary,
this is all about getting more
engaged with the community.
We are moving forward with
the WebObjects runtime.
Our skills are mostly at the runtime
level to try to improve the pipeline
between the web server and the
application server and give you all
the building blocks to build the best
components and the best models as well
as foundation classes that are closer
to the Java-based foundation classes.
We would like to help open and
community--help the creation
of open community-led tools.
We want to expose our formats,
no more proprietary formats,
and provide more example code for the
pieces that people still rely on but that
we have decided to move further from,
beyond.
We will ensure compatibility
between runtime on these open tools
we have talked or demoed today.
And the good news for Xcode is that end
support is going to be the main way for
both Java and WebObjects development,
the main build system,
and that should allow your team members
to pick and choose between any of
the different ideas that support end.
As a summary, well, Daryl,
this is your show.
Summarize.
Thank you.
What we talked about today,
we talked about how to use WebObjects
to build Web 2.0 applications,
and we think it's a great
platform and great foundation to
build cool Web 2.0 applications.
We also talked about just helping you
guys build cool apps and allowing you to
extend the WebObjects-based technology
and do interesting things with it.
And we think,
looking at this turnout today,
that there's a lot of
interest in doing this,
and there's a lot of
energy in the community.
and of course we have a lot of
great Leopard improvements and
I would encourage you to look or go
to the deployment session tomorrow.
There's a lot of good stuff to learn
about and find out what's coming.
So thank you for coming.
One more thing I have is I think
we have a little bit of Q&A time.
So if anybody has a good question and
doesn't flail us or anything like that,
I've got some t-shirts up here in
front that I'll throw out to you guys.